---
title: "A Design Space of Vision Science Methods for Visualization Research"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2020-10-05-VisMethods
excerpt: 'This paper is a catalogue of research methods that can be used to study and evaluate visualization designs.'
date: 2020-10-05
venue: 'IEEE VIS'
paperurl: ''
citation: 'Elliott, M. & Parente, F. (2014). &quot;Efficacy of memory rehabilitation therapy: A meta-analysis of TBI and stroke cognitive rehabilitation literature.&quot; <i>Brain Injury</i>. 28(12) 1610-1616.'
---
A growing number of efforts aim to understand what people see when using a visualization. These efforts provide scientific
grounding to complement design intuitions, leading to more effective visualization practice. However, published visualization research
currently reflects a limited set of available methods for understanding how people process visualized data. Alternative methods
from vision science offer a rich suite of tools for understanding visualizations, but no curated collection of these methods exists in
either perception or visualization research. We introduce a design space of experimental methods for empirically investigating the
perceptual processes involved with viewing data visualizations to ultimately inform visualization design guidelines. This paper provides
a shared lexicon for facilitating experimental visualization research. We discuss popular experimental paradigms, adjustment types,
response types, and dependent measures used in vision science research, rooting each in visualization examples. We then discuss
the advantages and limitations of each technique. Researchers can use this design space to create innovative studies and progress
scientific understanding of design choices and evaluations in visualization. We highlight a history of collaborative success between
visualization and vision science research and advocate for a deeper relationship between the two fields that can elaborate on and
extend the methodological design space for understanding visualization and vision.

[Download paper here](https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.06855)

